This week on the podcast, I have yet
another extra special guest. Zach
Buckwald is chairman and chief executive
officer at Russell Investments. Uh they
run about $370 billion. Uh I found this
to be a fascinating conversation.
Russell has been at the forefront of a
number of really interesting
innovations. Now they're putting
together really interesting active
portfolios including private
investments. With no further ado, my
conversation with Russell Investments,
Zack Buckwalt,
Zack Buckwald, welcome to Bloomberg.
>> Delighted to be here, Barry. Thanks for
having me.
>> Thank you so much for joining us. I
spoke to your predecessor about three
years ago, right after the pandemic. But
let's start talking a little bit about
your background. Undergraduate
bachelor's degree at Harvard. What were
you studying there?
>> I studied English. So this was not on
the on the docket that I was going to
have a career in finance.
>> Not not the plan, huh? So So you come
out of school um in 96. What was your
first gig?
>> So out of school I applied to law
school, not sort of knowing where I was
going. And I and I decided to have a
little break before I uh before I went
back to school. And I got recruited by
by Lehman Brothers. So, I spent um two
years uh working in structured finance
at at Lehman Brothers and it became
apparent to me right away I didn't want
to become a corporate lawyer uh because
I worked with lawyers and that was that
was not the job for me. Uh but I had a
knack for it. I enjoyed it. I always
liked math even though I was an English
major and you know you can find other
ways to put your writing and your
reading uh acumen to to work as well.
>> And I'm going to say late 1990s nobody
had any clue what was coming a decade
later.
>> Not at all. Now Leman Brothers was a
great place to to start my career. But
after two years, I went to Morgan
Stanley and that that's how I think of
the beginning of my career because I
spent 10 years at Morgan Stanley. I was
very invested in the firm and the firm
was was invested in me. I learned about,
you know, the capital markets top to
bottom and I I had a a career there that
took me from, you know, from a starting
associate role to uh running a business
that became the CLO business, which now
is like a real, you know, really
important part of capital markets.
>> What What were your titles there? What
did you do there?
>> Yeah. Uh well, I started as an associate
within um within fixed income. I um you
know I was in sales, I was in trading, I
was in structuring. Uh I always worked
within the credit derivative space and
then um ultimately credit derivatives
started getting wrapped up in different
ways and I um and I worked on the CLO
platform and Morgan Stanley uh had a
leading CLO platform that by the end of
my my time there I I ran um and that was
about you know I think about the role
that CLOS's play in the you know in the
in the markets today. It's an enormous
origination function that helps you know
finance a lot of corporate America.
>> John Mack was CEO at the time. Is that
right?
>> Uh, so I was there for Phil Purcell and
I was there for John Mack.
>> Wow. Those are two legends in in the
industry. What inspired you um to head
over to BlackRock?
>> I went to BlackRock with the guy that I
was working for at Morgan Stanley and we
created a business uh that was
essentially an advisory practice. This
was 2008 and BlackRock was hired to work
on a lot of the situations that were um
you know at at the start of the crisis.
Uh so we worked with the Federal
Reserve, we worked with the Treasury, a
lot of the big financial institutions
that had you know problematic portfolios
and BlackRock was very well positioned
as a buyside firm as a company that sort
of hadn't underwritten a lot of like the
problematic derivative um
>> did they they did they even have an
investing banking division back then?
>> No, we I mean we called it advisory but
essentially was like an investment
banking function. And I mean it was
really consultative, providing advice,
running portfolio analytics, thinking
about, you know, if you can separate
like the liquidity crisis from the
actual credit risk and and and uh you
sort of the expected cash flows on these
securities, what could you expect to get
back? And we,
>> you know, we created a roadmap for for
the government on how to invest in these
securities that they took away, you
know, that they essentially backstopped
from these big organizations and tried
to create a roadmap to bring them back
to par to repay all the taxpayers with
interest. and and in almost every
respect uh over over time uh the
government was successful in doing that
and Black Rockck really played a very
special role in um in creating those
road maps and you know it wasn't what I
would think of as like a highly
profitable business but in terms of like
the aura that was created around Black
Rockck as being like a solutions
provider you know sort of a force for
good in the world uh that that's what we
did and it was a it was a it was a great
role for me
>> I recall that era that Black Rockck
essentially had become the streets
bondesk like every brokerage firm used
to have a fairly substantial bond desk
and it seemed like Black Rockck has just
sucked up all that paper and and all
those traders.
>> Well, that sounds like an HR strategy
and I don't I don't know that I had any
anything part of that, but um but there
was a lot of talent uh for for sure and
there continues to be a lot of talent.
You know, some of those um you know,
some of the folks that worked on those
uh you know, on those assignments are
are essentially running Black Rockck um
now. And it was you know it was the
consultative nature of thinking about uh
you know thinking about the challenges
how we can create solutions to those
challenges thinking about the
aspirations and the ambitions and you
know that doesn't just apply to workout
situations that applies to all you know
kind of all the clients and it's
something that I've tried to import you
know into my current role at Russell.
>> So you're there for 15 years eventually
you become head of their institutional
business. That's that's a $2 trillion
silo. Um and you also helped establish
Black Rockck Retirement Solutions.
explain what these groups do.
>> Yeah. So, after um after the consulting
practice, I I went on to run the
insurance business at Black Rockck. That
was a $200 billion business at the time.
A little sleepy, not, you know, what I
would say is like a growth center. And
um and it was housed with the the
business itself was housed with true
insurance experts, asset liability
experts, um uh people who really
understood like the nuts and bolts of of
insurance companies. And I I did not
have an insurance background. And um you
know for the first year I had an
insurance guy sort of staple to me every
time I went to a client make sure I
didn't get out over my skis. But um you
know but you know this being an outsider
sometimes can actually really you know
help you think um think externally about
uh some of the things that might be
impacting the the clients the industry
the sector the business itself. And
early on um when I was in that role we
ran an analysis of the whole US
insurance industry every company that
was bigger than a billion dollars of
general account assets. And we asked
ourselves the question, what are some of
the external factors that could impact
these companies that they might not be
expecting or prepared for? And and where
could BlackRock play a role in helping
them deal with those kinds of
challenges? And we came up with seven
situations, Barry, that we thought were
going to have like seismic type impacts
on the companies. And four of them
happened. And in three of those cases,
Black Rockck went on to to play a really
big role and run the general accounts.
And that was more than hundred billion
dollars of assets. And we put on another
hundred billion dollars along the way.
So that was a case where the business
started growing like very meaningfully
and I think Black Rockck sort of paid a
lot of attention to that and realized g
we could play a bigger role with these
insurance companies. They're going to do
a lot more interesting things than just
invest in you know sort of high quality
fixed income over time. You also had
some interesting stuff happening with um
Apollo and Athen. They were kind of
remaking the model a little bit and um
and BlackRock you know pays a lot of
attention to what's going on in the in
the outside world and we um we we grew
the business
>> to say the very least. What are they 121
13 trillion dollars now in assets?
>> Uh it's a good business
>> to say the very least. So 10 years at
Morgan Stanley, 15 years at Black
Rockck. Uh what lessons did you take
from those experiences to Russell
Investments?
>> Yeah. Well, first and foremost, it's all
about the client. And if you lose sight
of that, understanding the what the
client is dealing with, their
challenges, their ambitions, their
aspirations, being a consultative
provider. Um, if you start from a push
out like here are the products that I
have, here are the things that I've done
before, it almost never works. And it
also that's not the the age that we're
living in today. The age that we're
living in is how can I how can I help
you achieve the outcomes that you're
trying to get to? How can I anticipate
some of the challenges that you're going
to experience? How can I help you learn
from some of the things that I've, you
know, I've seen in the sector or the
industry? And you start from there. Um,
and it builds a foundation with the
client that is just sort of
irreplaceable. So that's I mean that was
one really important learning. Now I I I
came into Russell um because Russell had
like first of all it's a 90-year legacy.
Thank you for starting with that.
>> 1936 that's a that's a you're coming up
on a century soon.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Um I'm really proud to to
run I'm the eighth CEO by the way of of
in 90 years of Russell investments. I
mean that's so for a US asset manager
that's old. And I think about the things
that Russell has done in that time
Barry. I mean it's been a real innovator
and category creator. Everybody knows
the Russell indexes which were um you
know sort of cultivated and innovated in
all sorts of cool ways and we all have
it in our pensions and our 401ks. Uh you
know Russell was the original pension
investment consultant. We created that
category. Russell was the original OCIO
and we're still a leader in in OCIO.
These are these are really you know sort
of important categories that have a big
impact on um on the investment
ecosystem. And what was what was special
to me about Russell and the reason I
wanted to join is Russell's approach to
doing all of these solutions is it's
entirely open architecture. So the view
is we build and implement portfolios at
Russell which is you know something I
worked on at BlackRock and to some
extent at Morgan Stanley too but the
idea is we use best of breed managers
and strategies from around the whole
investment universe. So if I put
together an OCIO portfolio at Russell,
I'm building, you know, fixed income
manage, you know, the best quality fixed
income managers, the best private assets
managers, the best cash and so on and
best index products. You know, we can
kind of it's it's we can kind of go
everywhere within the ecosystem. And
that was a model that I was very excited
about because it became more about like
thinking through the lens of what the
client is looking to achieve and how can
I use all of the tools and the
ingredients available as opposed to sort
of a set, you know, set of tools that I
that I had uh at hand from the company
that I worked for.
>> Really interesting. We're going to talk
about um pensions OCI. We're going to
talk about a little later. I didn't
realize this till I started doing my
homework. Russell is effectively
credited with inventing smart beta. I
mean, who who knew that? I think of a
couple of other firms as taking the
leadership in that recently, but 40
years ago, you guys were on the on the
cutting edge of that. What is it like
running a firm that has a near
centurylong
um legacy? How does that affect how you
think about risks and opportunities?
>> Yeah, it I mean the legacy is a is a
wonderful thing, but you know, you can't
rest like we all know we can't rest on
our laurels. It's um you know the the
the job for me is to make sure that I'm
taking sort of the best parts of the
history and the legacy, the innovative
spirit, all these cool things that we've
done and then evolving them for the
world that we're in today. Our our our
mainline business, we have we have sort
of two central businesses. It's OCIO and
its model portfolios that we do on the
retail side, which is essentially same
kind of ideas of the institutional
business. It's building great portfolios
and implementing them. 90% of our
business is those is uh falls into those
two categories. what I need to do today
is make sure that I'm using all of the
tools available. So, as the market moves
from, you know, active products to
passive products as the market starts
integrating private assets with public
assets, all of that is part of our
portfolio today. And and so the goal,
you know, as the leader is to make sure
that the strategy is incorporating,
we're open architecture. It's in it's
truly incorporating the entire ecosystem
into the into what we build for our
clients.
>> I I want to get your feedback on a quote
of yours uh I found in my in my
homework. quote, "Financial security is
a central challenge for this industry.
How did your experiences
at Black Rockck at Morgan Stanley and
way back when at Lehman Brothers? How
did it affect your your concept of
financial security?
>> Financial security and retirement
security especially took me a little bit
of time to hone in on, Barry. I mean, I
think back to my years at Morgan Stanley
and you know, the job there was very
much about sort of like finding the
arbitrage in the markets. It's where can
we make money as a sales and trading
function and we help clients along the
way you know by delivering the products
and the services that they want but
first and foremost it was about the
investment bank and um and that changed
for me. I had a I had a review with my
boss at the time and she said to me
something um that she meant as a
compliment. She said to me, "Zack, you
can really smell the money." And I went
away and that was not the legacy that I
wanted for my career. And you know, I
moved to Black Rockck uh shortly after
that where I was helping, you know, the
the government, the taxpayers deal with
like really critical issues, like really
big thorny problems that were going to
have an impact on, you know, on the
quality of life of the people in this in
this country. And it um it was a
complete reset of my perspective. You
know, now we build portfolios at
Russell, but you know, if I'm working
for a pension or 401k or an insurance
company, at the end of the day, I'm
serving individuals. I'm helping them
and we don't lose sight of that. I'm
helping them have a secure retirement.
Now, by the way, they have to do their
part, too, because it's also about, you
know, saving early, contributing, making
sure that you're um, you know, learning
about the the plan and making the right
decisions. But the role that we play
within the industry is a make or break
in terms of whether they're able to um
whether they're able to achieve that.
Now you also have something going on in
the background that's um that's going to
have a very big impact in the next
couple of decades with retirees in
America and and that is that really the
risk has shifted now the retirement
security risk has shifted from you know
organizations like the companies and the
government
>> companies in defined benefits to defined
contribution
>> to defined contribution right so the
standard model the standard pension
model is shifting to the 401k and today
still about half of retirees have access
to a pension and that plus plus social
security more or less gets the job done,
but in another decade it's going to be
less than a third and another two
decades it's going to be very little at
all. So that means that now the 401k is
the staple that's going to uh you know
result in a a secure comfortable
retirement or or not. And you know the
the the big challenge with a 401k is
that the risk of saving investing and
also de accumulation taking that pot of
money and knowing how long you know the
longevity risk knowing how thinking
about how long you're going to live and
how to allot it over time. All of that
risk will now be borne by the individual
and we have not uh fully processed that
in the you know within within the
country that this is a crisis that's
coming that people aren't prepared to to
own that responsibility and the system
today isn't set up in such a way that
sort of the decisions are very easy to
you know to make it the the onus is
really still on the individual.
>> So that's really fascinating. How does
that affect what you see within your
role as CEO at Russell Investments?
>> Yeah, well thanks Barry. Our whole
mission is built around helping people
achieve financial security. And we do
that on the institutional side by
partnering with corporate sponsors and
helping to you know ensure that the
plans that they're you know putting in
place and the role that they play
through matching through you know
providing lifetime income whatever the
set of benefits are is going to be um is
going to serve the participants in the
way that we think is going to help them
have you know retire with confidence and
with with security. But as the um you
know as the machine shifts and it moves
more toward a 401k and then you know a
lot of folks end up with a nest egg that
they have to manage on their own the
goal is to make sure that on the wealth
side we also have sort of the right
kinds of products and services and
solutions that help them you know
understand income help them understand
deumulation help them get the right
diversification help them get fair fees.
I mean the goal is to make sure that
we're um we're really delivering sort of
a set of products and services that's
going to allow them to live the kind of
retirement that they all they'll hope
for. really really interesting. So
whenever I talk to people about Russell,
everybody knows the Russell 2000. Um the
question is what does Russell do? How do
they make money on they they must do
something more than the Russell 2000.
Tell us a little bit about the different
business lines at Russell Investments.
>> Sure. So the index business is now owned
by London Stock Exchange and they uh
they do a magnificent uh job with it and
we still have a little bit of the you
know the aura. Every time I'm in the
elevator, I see the advertisements for
Russell and I think I didn't have to pay
for that ad. [laughter]
We get we get the benefit. Uh the
business is predominantly an it's an
active asset management business and and
we really uh have one main function,
Barry. It's about building and
implementing great portfolios and we do
it for institutional clients and we do
it for retail clients. So building the
portfolios is really about sort of you
it's portfolio construction. It's
strategies and managers. For 90 years
we've done manager research at uh at
Russell. We have, you know, a huge team
of people now. It's augmented by AI and
technology helping us look at 16,000
different managers and figuring out, we
invest with about 225 of them. You know,
figuring out uh which managers and
strategies we think make sense in the
different uh portfolios we create and
then the implementation is one of the
coolest parts because that's we actually
do the investing on behalf of the
managers. They they typically give us
model portfolios and and then all the
things around the portfolio that can,
you know, be very incremental. It's the
the transitions, it's the the hedging,
uh completion exercise, completion
mandates, um overlays, and you know,
those things can be alpha generative.
They can be very important for risk
management. You can add a values overlay
for for clients. Um and so it's a it's a
full portfolio delivery at the end of
the day.
>> So, you mentioned you're researching
16,000 different managers and internally
you're generating just a fire hose of
data. How do you analyze that? What
value is that data to the firm?
>> Yeah, I mean the data is everything and
we we had we do have a you know
historical trove of of data. Um but it
changes quickly. You think about how
quickly the uh you know the investment
ecosystem evolves and you know managers
have strategies that make sense on one
day and then things change and and those
strategies uh don't make sense. So it's
it really has to stay current. Um even
though we you know we certainly value
the the historical uh data and
performance and use it um we start with
16,000 and the first layer is largely
technologydriven. So it's uh you know we
have huge feeds that take into um you
know that that take in and analyze all
of the available information that's
provided to us by managers directly and
also that we can find out there in the
in the public uh uh domain. When you say
managers, are these mutual fund
managers, ETF managers, private
managers, or all the above?
>> It's it's all of the above. I mean,
typically because of our size and scale,
we don't we don't invest in a ton of
direct um like uh uh shared products. Um
we do much more se sort of separate
accounts and um but we do invest in
mutual funds. We do invest in ETFs or
index products where where that makes
sense and that can help you know drive
down cost or you know help with
diversification. Um but uh but the
managers is for the a the active
strategies and active represents I'm
going to guess probably 85% of the
assets in that that we manage overall.
Remember we're using different active
strategies as the building blocks to
create these portfolios. So
predominantly it's not Russell managed
although you know we can talk about the
smart beta that you you brought up. Um
predominantly these are externally
managed uh strategies that we bring
together and then we collapse the whole
thing together in one portfolio and we
look enterprisewide because you might
have you know three active equity
managers and they're not paying
attention to what the other ones are
doing and so you can end up with outsiz
positions or underweights. You can end
up with um you know people on opposite
sides of trades and we look to you know
to correct or make adjustments where it
makes sense. So you guys were very
innovative and helped create the concept
of outsourced chief investment officer
OCIOS. Tell us a little bit about that
business line. Who are the clients and
and h how much assets are uh does that
run? Yeah. So, OCIO represents the
lion's share of the 370 billion that
that we manage. And it's a fast growing
segment, not just at Russell, but it's
growing because a lot of companies are
are outsourcing their pensions or their
401ks to, you know, folks that live and
breathe the markets and that think about
retirement security like we do all all
day long. So, um, you know, a typical
day at Bloomberg might have one top
story about a big corpor uh, you know,
big US corporate that's chosen to
outsource their retirement portfolio.
Now, we work with a lot of in-house
teams as well. We help by bringing in,
you know, any of those implementation
services like transitions and hedging.
We do that for a lot of um a lot of
companies that have internal teams. But
sometimes sponsors decide to um you
know, to hire retirement experts to to
run their um to run their retirement
portfolio. And that's when they would
bring in an outsourced chief investment
officer. We're a top five provider and
it's some of the big, you know, the
other big asset managers that that also
provide that. We're the ones who do it
with an open architecture framework. So
the goal is not to, you know, have
Russell run the whole portfolio. It's to
bring in best of breed managers and to
bring those together.
>> Huh. Really, really kind of interesting.
When you talk about hedging,
>> um, are you hedging equity, hedging
fixed income? What what is the hedging
business like?
>> Yeah, it can be all of the above. Also,
uh, foreign, you know, foreign currency,
um, uh, you know, it can be hedging
individual sectors. You might have a
sponsor that's in the technology sector
and they feel like they already have
enough exposure to technology and so you
can you know make some adjustments to
the portfolio that way. You can also
build in a values orientation for you
know organizations that have a
particular you know view of the world
that they want to express in their
investment portfolios.
>> So let's talk a little bit about smart
beta which Russell helped pioneer in
way before your time or my time for that
matter. Um is this still something
that's a key part of what you're doing?
So we still have a strong footprint
within systematic Barry and you know
Russell manages on average between 10
and 20% of the portfolios that uh that
we look after and systematic typically
uh is within that that 10 to 20%. We use
it not to make you know credit decisions
or stock picking decisions like that's
not that's not our game. That's why we
hire external managers who are you know
true experts in that. um we use it to
like round out the portfolio to make
adjustments to make sure that the
portfolio is complying with why the
client hired us or whatever their
investment you know their stated
investment strategy says. Um but smart
beta is you know one of the many places
where Russell was an innovator and you
know these things can sort of take on a
life of their own as the as the industry
adopts those practices.
>> We mentioned artificial intelligence
earlier. tell us how you're using AI in
either risk management, portfolio
construction, or just data analytics.
>> So Barry, we have a list this long of
sort of, you know, desired use cases
that we're working on for for AI, and I
I think we're still in in early innings
here, but the kinds of things that we
use AI for today very effectively are
more task oriented. You know, we have it
fill out our RFPs. We have it build
pitch decks. We have actually we use AI
to um you know read 500page filings um
you know which we used to have a human
being uh do back in the day. Um and it's
very effective at that. Uh the real goal
for you know for this company is that I
want AI to actually help us with
investment insights with manager
research insights that's going to
actually drive performance at the end of
the day. And I think we still have a
fair amount of we're making progress but
I think we still have a fair amount of
work before uh before that happens. Um
but uh you know that's the view where
having you know having a a portfolio
where we look after 16,000 different
strategies and and managers we're
starting from a place where we like as
you said we have troves of of
information of historical information
that we're relying on and that we're
using AI to sort of help build out that
framework. So, I'm I'm always fascinated
by, you know, the old joke is no one's
ever seen a bad back test and AI and
those sort of things are o only capable
of looking at what's already occurred.
And built into all all of those back
tests and to some some degree built in
to AI is that the future is going to
resemble the past. How do you navigate
around that? because sometimes the
future doesn't resemble the past. Just
look at AI and how it's changing so many
aspects of of various businesses.
>> Yeah. Well, that's a place where, you
know, I'm still pretty optimistic that
there's an enormous amount of value
creation to come, Barry, because the um,
you know, what we've seen from AI so
far, at least how it's how it's shown up
in terms of, you know, in in the market
performance has been almost entirely uh,
Harvard in the uh, technology sector.
It's where, you know, sort of where AI
exists. What we haven't seen yet is all
the other sectors that we know are going
to be sort of enormously impacted um by
the proper use of AI, the creative and
innovative use of AI. So, you know, you
see a little bit of it in like
healthcare and life sciences, but you
know, logistics and shipping and
consumer goods and in investments, asset
management, they're all going to get
transformed um by AI because it's
changing things. And you know, this is
where I'm I'm really optimistic that we
have a lot more room to run in in in the
markets today is because you're still
not seeing like all the, you know, the
potential and the benefits of of AI
showing up in some of these, you know,
what we think of as sectors that are
peripheral to technology. But, you know,
in truth, technology is like critical to
how we, you know, how we all exist.
>> Makes makes a lot of sense. Uh, let's
talk about private markets. How can
Russell Investments help their clients
access private markets between AI and
privates? Those are probably the two
hottest topics we've been talking about
this year.
>> So privates represents uh about 7% of
the portfolios that we manage. It's uh
heavier in in the institutional
portfolios. It's lighter right now
within wealth portfolios. There's a lot
more growth that's that's going to
happen, especially in wealth. I think
the average wealth client has something
like 1 or 2% um of their portfolio
outside of their real estate holdings
about 1 or 2% in privates and that
number uh is going to grow and and
should grow right because this is a
really important source of you know
return and risk diversification and if
you rely on the historical precedents
it's been um an enormous outperformer at
large uh and so uh you know kind of
delivering you know access is a it's a
very important you know function that we
do at Russell but also that we work with
our financial advisor partner ers to to
figure out the best ways because it's,
you know, how you deliver privates to to
to um uh institutional investors is is
different, right? There's tax
considerations and reporting
considerations, liquidity considerations
that all need to be considered with with
individuals. So, we're trying to do this
um you know, really judiciously within
wealth portfolios, wealthy people,
wealthy families. There's a lot of room
to run here. you know, I'm being extra
cautious when I think about, you know,
sort of 401ks or, uh, you know, 401k
graduates, you know, middle class
people, nest eggs, because that's where,
you know, I think about, um, are these
appropriate investments? Do they help
with financial security? Can you get
your money back when you need it? Are
the fees, you know, fair and
appropriate? And and so I think you need
to be extra careful with um uh with uh
you know sort of true working people um
working families and their their
retirement nest eggs but wealth at large
there's a there's a ton of room for for
private markets.
>> So So you mentioned 7% where could this
possibly go? Is this 10% 15%
20%? I I've heard people say 60 40 is
out. It's now 50 30 20 or whatever the
numbers add up to. I don't know where it
gets to. It's certainly going to be
north of of 7%. Um, you know, I think
it's I think you have to think not only
about what's appropriate for the
portfolios. Listen, if you do a
backward-looking analysis of private
equity and private credit, you know,
which I outside of, you know, specific
real estate investments that people
choose themselves, those are like the
two biggest food groups. If you run an
analysis of what those investments
looked like over the last 20 years,
Barry, it's going to be different than
what you're going to get in the next 20
years for a lot of reasons. But yeah,
I'll tell you from my personal
perspective right now, you know, in the
last two years, my vets's office has
been bought by private equity. Wow. My
landscaper, uh, my garbage collection,
uh, my dentist, they're all owned by
private equity now.
>> And, uh, you know, they're doing these
rollups and there's lots of efficiencies
to be created on bringing these, you
know, these practices together. But, you
know, that's a pretty different
investment than buying a company, right?
and making a company better and selling
that company which historically is you
know where where private equity made its
name and its reputation and the and the
return stream that we've seen. So you
know another thing I think about is how
am I going to make sure that the you
know risk and return profiles I'm
putting into these portfolios that we
can you know reasonably predict what
they're going to look like and that we
can manage them you know sort of
appropriately given that the asset pools
might look a little different than what
we were you know what we were investing
in 10 years ago. Hm. Really really
interesting. So let's talk a little bit
about uh some of the things that are
going on in the market today. Fee
compression has been a giant factor
really since the financial crisis. You
recently decided to reduce some of the
fees on your flagship fixed income
products. Tell us a little bit about
what drove your decision and what are
you thinking about in terms of fees
generally. I mean the governing precept
Barry is always to make sure we're
providing value to the clients and you
know we do that uh by charging a fair
and appropriate fee for what it is we're
doing. If if I'm going to focus on
anything it's less about what's the fee
that I can charge and more about making
sure that I'm invaluable to these
clients and that we're really you know
helping them uh achieve their goals.
When you the truth is when you do a
great job for the client the fee almost
becomes uh um not an issue. Now, having
said that, we have some businesses that
are scaled businesses and that I compete
with, you know, with other good
providers and I have to make sure that
we're staying competitive. So, we're not
in any way immune to uh fee compression.
Um, but uh you know, but if you can
provide a really good value proposition,
it's not such a big deal.
>> So, this has been an ongoing factor in
in the industry, particularly for active
managers and and Russell is primarily an
active manager. Uh are you seeing any
changes in this trend globally? I mean
it started very much in the United
States um with with entities like Black
Rockck and and especially Vanguard.
You're a global firm. What does this
look like overseas?
>> Yeah, fee compression in our space is
you know it is uh comes through in
different ways uh globally. OCIO is the
place where we've been sort of most
susceptible to, you know, to fee
compression, Barry. And you know if I
think about who we compete against um
the landscape has changed for us over
the last 10 years. You know 10 years ago
I competed largely against like the
consult the traditional consultants and
we had a very different offering. We
actually implemented the portfolio. We
weren't just doing manager research sort
of on paper. We were actually trading
the portfolio and um you know doing the
risk management and the overlays and the
completions things that were a very big
value ad and we were unique in that
respect. And then along came the really
big asset managers that saw OCIO in part
as sort of a distribution function. You
know, if I can deliver the entire
portfolio, I can put a lot of my own
underlying products into that portfolio.
And by the way, that can be a great
business for you if you have.
>> But that that's a closed architecture.
You guys run a very open architecture.
>> We run a completely open architecture.
And we're unique in that it's true open
architecture. 80 plus percent and
sometimes 100% of the assets come from
third party managers. But we still have
to compete against organizations that
are running their own version which
might be closed or semi semi-closed. And
you know if you have a whole lot of
underlying products you're putting into
the portfolio, it gives you a lot of
leeway to change the fee or to compress
the fee at the OCIO level because you're
making money in all sorts of other ways.
Russell doesn't do that. So um it does
mean that we were susceptible to some of
the fee compression and our fees have
narrowed. But the way I see the solution
here is just to make sure that the value
proposition that we're offering, the way
we go about building an OCIO, the costs
that, you know, it takes, the the the
human capital that's required, um, you
know, we put over hund00 million into
our technology system, uh, that allows
us to build these open architecture
portfolios. When clients understand what
it is that they get from us, paying a
slightly higher fee doesn't seem to be a
big deal.
>> Uh, what about the private markets that
we're looking at? We were talking about
private equity, private credit.
>> First, is it possible that those sort of
things can be indexed and then second,
they've always been pricier than public
markets. Are we starting to see any fee
compression along those lines?
>> Yeah. Um, so we haven't seen a ton of
fee compression. Um I mean those are
cases where I think the value
proposition is crystal clear and you
know the high performing managers can
charge higher fees or you know
substantial fees because they've really
delivered and you know in general they
continue to deliver. I think if they
stop delivering and the or you know and
we start seeing what look more like
public markets performance or even weak
public markets performance it's going to
be much harder for them to charge those
those fees. But that hasn't happened
yet. You know, especially within private
credit and and um uh private equity,
there's been, you know, real
outperformance, especially at the top of
the heap versus the public markets. So,
it becomes easier to to justify those
fees.
>> Makes a lot of sense. So, let's let's
venture into the world of public policy
a little bit. You've proposed national
account programs uh to help young people
start investing early. The most recent
big bill that passed uh in this
administration has these accounts for
babies. Every kid that's going to be
born is going to get what is it $1,500
or $3,000? I don't know what number
$1,000.
>> $1,000. All right. Better than nothing.
But um where do you see these sort of
programs going? And if you start
investing at age 1 day, what potential
compounding can we see 50, 75, 100 years
later?
>> Now you're really talking my language.
Uh when Trump was elected, I wrote a
piece that we put into Baronss that
Baron's published uh saying that we
should give $1,000 to every kid in
America and open an investment account
and let them actually learn about the
power of compounding because it's
different when you actually own the
assets. And you know, when you give
people an investment account, you can
find lots of ways to create some educa,
you know, investment education that goes
along with that.
>> Let me just interrupt you because it
sounds like a lot of money. There are
three million kids born a year, it's $3
billion,
>> which to a $ 31 trillion economy and a
six or seven trillion government spend
is is a rounding error.
>> It it it's nothing in the grand scheme
of things. And you know the you know
you're on to something because it got
actually got criticized by both the
right and the left and the right said oh
this is another entitlement program. Oh
anyway we put this thing into baronss
and to my surprise and delight it ended
up in in the big beautiful bill and it
actually got it actually passed. It
became
>> and funded right
>> it became legislation and you know
Treasury is working hard now thinking
through uh um uh all you know the
implementation and we're we're helping
along the way. It's um it's an awesome
program because fundamentally what it
does is it makes investing universal.
You know, all these families in the
United States that think that investing
is not for them or they never had any
exposure to it. And that's by the way
most of America,
>> right? Um, now to the extent they have
a, you know, have a kid, they are going
to have an investment account that
that's, you know, there is a uh um there
is a thousand dollars to to kickstart it
from the government, but there's going
to be lots of avenues for families to
make continued contributions, for
employers to make contributions, for
philanthropies to make contributions
over time on on hopefully a tax
advantaged basis. And folks are going to
see the way compounding really works.
So, it's not the $1,000 contribution,
which as you said is kind of a drop in
the bucket, at least as a you know, as a
as a burden on on society. It's the it's
um you know, what can you pull together
from all of the different constituents
that are going to want to contribute to
a program like this. So, we're we're
really excited and you know, I think
that ultimately I hope this will
dovetail with retirement security. You
know, you you said it when when you ask
what can happen in 50 or 75 years. I
think initially, you know, the thought
is these might help fund um college
education. And by the way, with a little
bit of contributions on an ongoing
basis, it will fund a college education
with with the compounding. Um but over
time, there's six or seven of these
programs. And eventually, you know,
maybe we can pull them all together and
create a national program that actually
funds um people's retirement. I
>> I I'm a fan of using milestones as an
excuse to give some sort of a gift. You
can see sweet 16s or kid turns 13 or
whatever it is.
>> Y
>> grandma and grandpa write a check and
put it right into their account. Here's
some Eli Liy or here's some whatever S&P
500. Knock yourself out and that's going
to just appreciate over the next, you
know, x number of decades. It it could
really make a substantial difference in
in uh the retirement of people who have
yet to even be born. It's absolutely
true. And and by the way, it's investing
in uh in the US stock market,
>> right?
>> So, I'm assuming the S&P 500 would count
and any of the Microsoft or Lily or
whatever Apple, Amazon, whatever big
tech company you're enthusiastic about.
I would recommend a broader, more
diversified approach than a single
stock. Right. I mentioned Lily because I
just know um a friend just put a bunch
of Lily stock in his nephew's account
[laughter] and I'm like, "Oh, what are
you doing that for?" He's like, "Just
doing a transfer. It's taxfree and I
don't have to worry about it."
>> Well, I'm I'm not a stock picker, but
but Lily is a great company. Uh having
diversified exposure in these in these
accounts is is is is the way to go. And
you know, listen, a a generation ago,
Barry, the version of that was not so
much Lily stock. who was very typically
a a US Treasury bond, right? That's what
you got when you turned 13 or 16 or had
that milestone birthday. And a Treasury
bond in the long term, you know, you you
you'd rather be in the stock market. You
get
>> you don't want two two and a half% ahead
of above inflation. That doesn't excite
you.
>> I'd rather I'd rather have the long-term
uh return of the the S&P for sure.
>> Especially if it's a newborn or even a
teenager, their investment window is 60
70 years. That's that's exactly right.
And and the trick here is you have to
get people to actually understand
because that 16-year-old when they're
22, they're going to get a job that's
going to have a 401k and they have to
understand why am I taking 6% out of my,
you know, out of my paycheck when, you
know, my starting salary might not even
be enough to get, you know, to pay my
rent and my other bills. Why would I
want to do that? And and they really, if
they understand the power of compounding
and the long-term implications of that,
they're going to they're going to buy
into it. I I really didn't think about
my 401k until I was in my 30s, right?
But if I actually had money put in
account when I was born, by the time
you're 25, you're going to see some
impact from compounding.
>> Uh 100%. Well, I'm not too worried about
you, Barry.
>> Oh, I I'll be all right.
>> You'll be you'll be all right. But um
you know, but think about all those
folks that don't um you know, the
average income in America is still
$70,000, right? all those folks that
don't have access to um uh to
investments and they're not thinking
about am I going to be able to make my
contribution at age 22 because they're
thinking about can I can I pay my rent
>> afford to pay my rent
>> right the bottom half of the economic
strata in this country and we're having
this conversation on election day right
in New York where it looks like
>> um at least the leader up until uh up
until today has been someone who
describes themselves as a socialist and
has made affordability their their key
campaign theme. This is going to be an
ongoing issue, especially for the bottom
half of of earners and savers.
>> That's right. We're we're not a
political organization at Russell, but I
do concur. Affordability is the issue.
Um, and I think it's not a left issue. I
think it's an issue for for everybody,
almost everybody in this country, and
we're going to be hearing a lot about it
from from all sides. You know, I wrote a
piece um after after the the the baby
accounts, which they call the Trump
accounts, by the way.
>> After that became part of the
legislation, I wrote a piece that the
Washington Post published that
essentially described what these
accounts are and the impact that it can
have in terms of helping to educate our
population about the power of investing
and compounding. And it was very
interesting to see the commentary. You
know, when you publish something in the
journal or or the post, you get a lot of
you get a lot of comments. And um by and
large the the vast majority of the
comments said why wouldn't you just
write us a refund check which is what we
got during COVID by the way like
stimulus type checks
>> and it was the opposite of the point
that I was trying to make.
>> We don't want you to spend this we want
you to save this.
>> We want you to save it and to understand
what the difference is from a savings
account or a treasury bond versus
investing it into the markets and
getting to see longterm long-term
compounding. So it it it was honestly it
was a little bit of a refresher for me
that we have a lot of work to do to help
people understand why a program like
this can actually help them.
>> So as someone who's been writing in
public for nearly 30 years, my best
advice to you is is simply never read
the comments [laughter] that there was a
golden era of blogs in like the early to
mid 2000s where the comments were these
like fantastic communities. All of that
has kind of migrated to Reddit. If you
want to see lightly moderated
intelligent debates with some nonsense
thrown in um along the way, that's
that's what's left of that uh sort of
issue. I I think um even YouTube used to
do a better job at moderating the
comments. The the spam and the bots
still slip in every now and then.
>> It does give you a perspective on what's
on people's minds, though, even though
some of the comments are like unhinged,
right? uh you can tell like what's
coming through what what are people's
you know fears and worries and concerns
if you can if you can read it through
the you know the craziness.
>> Yeah, you have to you have to fight your
way through it. It's kind of fascinating
because I'm going to just digress for a
moment. We all are subject to these
cognitive errors and these behavioral
um biases and and it very much shows up
in in people's portfolios and the
decisions they they make. I I wake up on
a day like today where NASDAQ is down
one and a half percent. I know I'm going
to see a bunch of emails. Ah, you told
us to stay long and look, we're down one
and a half% today. I knew I should have
gotten out of the markets. What are you
talking about? We're up 17% for the year
and the NASDAQ's up 23%. This is the
price of admission. You have to deal
with some volatility. I mean this is a
place by the way where technology has
not actually served people in their
retirement portfolios because if you can
pull up your phone and in 3 seconds you
know you work as a teacher or a nurse or
or whatever and you pull up your phone
and in 3 seconds you see your portfolio
is down one and a half% and and at some
level it flips a switch and you think my
portfolio is is is in trouble or I
should sell like that's how you get to
really bad decisions because we all you
know we all know long term like if
you're man if you're
>> do we all know that because I'm not sure
everybody body does and there's such an
inherent bias towards action.
>> Don't just sit there do something,
>> right?
>> Uh that that just seems to be human
nature.
>> It's anathema to how you're supposed to
manage a retirement portfolio, though.
You you you by the way, you can make
adjustments over over time, but the goal
is not to pull out when you think the
market is going to be down. We all know
that the bouncebacks, by the way, happen
faster and stronger than ever. I mean,
you you think about like what the
bounceback looked like during the
financial crisis or during the dotcom uh
uh bust. It took years to bounce back
and then you think about COVID or or uh
um
>> even April or Liberation Day, right? The
bounceback happens. Yeah. Almost
instantly and stronger than before.
>> So, you know, this is a case where the
phone really does not help you, right?
If you're going to make a decision to
pull out because you see something going
on in the markets on on an on an off
day. Uh, and you know, as we're as we're
thinking through how to implement new
programs like the the Trump accounts,
you know, my goal is you want to have
like lots of transparency, but you don't
want to make it easy for people to make
bad decisions. You have to help them
make good long-term decisions.
>> A little bit of choice architecture that
prevents those sort of things. Last
question before I get to the standard
questions we ask all of our guests. What
do you think investors are not talking
about, but perhaps should be? what what
are the important overlooked topics,
assets, geography, policy, whatever that
that should be getting a little more uh
following.
>> Yeah. Well, Barry, I'm still really
positive on on AI and how much more room
to run we have. Uh, you know, there's
been so much to talk about um about how
we haven't seen a broadening in the
markets. You know, most of the value
capture has happened within the the
technology industry, but um you know,
but I think every sector is going to be
transformed, almost every sector
transformed by AI. um as much as it was
by by the internet and we just haven't
seen that come through yet. But I can
tell you every company that we invest in
is thinking about this and working on it
behind the scenes even if it's not
showing up yet in their um in their
quarterly earnings reports. But it's all
happening and you're going to start
seeing by the way you'll see winners and
losers both you know sort of specific
companies and sectors. Um, but there's
going to be enormous amounts of
efficiency gains and enormous amounts
of, you know, sort of value creation
that happens as a result of that. Now, I
don't think it's going to be a straight
line, but I do think it's coming shorter
term rather than uh rather than just
longer term.
>> Back in 2019, I interviewed Joe Davis,
who's the chief economist at Vanguard. Y
>> and they had this fascinating research
report. Eventually, it became a book um
that all technological innovations take
place in two phases. The first phase is
kind of what we're experiencing right
now in AI which is wild prices couple of
hand everybody knows a handful of
companies very boom boom like some
people have been too many a lot of
people have been calling it a bubble the
second phase is where the value creation
spreads out to the rest of rest of
>> rest of the market rest of the industry
rest of the economy I see it the same
way you do this is just going to make
all of us more efficient more
productive, more profitable,
>> right? That's exactly how I see this
playing out. And you still have to pay
attention because, you know, we all
remember during the the first the first
dotcom phase before every company
started incorporating, you know, the
internet into its business strategy and
and its operations. Uh there were
winners and there were losers and and
the winners are still around and they're
you know they essentially uh you know
run global commerce today and and the
losers went away. uh we're going to see
some of that across sectors and you know
that's something that investors need to
pay close attention to but you know writ
large I see a lot of value creation
>> huh I'm I'm I'm always like to hear that
sort of stuff. So let's jump into our
favorite questions that we ask all of
our guests starting with uh tell us
about your mentors who helped shape your
career.
>> Sure. I had a great mentor at BlackRock,
a guy called Mark Mcome, who was a a
vice chairman of the company. And he put
me into a couple of jobs. Um, and he
nurtured me and supported me. But he
also he encouraged me to, you know,
think like the outsider that I am. You
know, when he put me into the insurance
job without having an insurance
background, he sort of said, "Bring, you
know, bring all the capabilities and the
perspective that you have from all the
other things that you've done." And
that, you know, really helped us think
like an external provider and and and
grow that business. By the way, I'm a uh
I'm I'm a gay guy in finance. So, I I I
come at it from a uh from an outsers's
point of view, kind of looking in. And
um and that has informed just about
everything that I do at um you know, at
Russell and and and before that is
thinking about what's working, what
isn't working, what do I think we might
be able to do better, what have we not,
you know, the question that you asked,
what are people not talking about, what
have we not asked about? And that's, you
know, often my my starting point. And I
think if I had come in with the insider
status, it would have been harder for me
to take that perspective.
>> That's really interesting. It it's
affected your perspective, you you see
the world both as a participant but also
an outsider.
>> Yeah, that's right. And you know, this
is the first time I've been to Bloomberg
in a in a couple of years. But when I
when I took the job at um at Russell,
even before I had started, Bloomberg
invited me to come speak at a conference
and I was, you know, flattered and and
excited. And then I learned it was their
diversity conference and I [laughter] I
was the the gay CEO and um and I said,
"Invite me back five times to talk about
investing and retirement and on the
sixth time I'll come talk about uh
diversity."
>> Huh. That's interesting. You know, in
all the research we we do. That did not
come up in anything. It's not it's not
uh anything that bubbles up to the top
of search. Um although the old joke is
if you if you want to hide something,
disclose it at the end of an hourong
podcast.
>> [laughter]
>> No one will hear it. But uh you know
what it's like with all the YouTube s
there's a there's a drop off but I
always find that that amusing. Let's
talk about books. What are some of your
favorites? What are you reading right
now?
>> Yeah. So I read a lot of fiction like
you know Cormick McCarthy and Tyler. I'm
reading a book called The Inheritance
right now which is uh like a family
drama. Um it's a escapist for me to get
away from. I don't read a lot of finance
books.
>> Um I'm the same way. Every now and then
something will you know come across that
I have to read. that's finance related.
Um, I have a big stack of fiction
waiting to go on vacation with me next
month. Let's talk about streaming. What
are you watching or listening to you?
What's keeping you entertained? It's
either on Netflix or Amazon or whatever.
>> Yeah, it's all toddler fair right now.
I've got two three-year-olds in the
house. So, we've got twins.
>> Twins. Yeah, it's, you know, all
full-time Moana and Frozen and
>> uh Daniel Tiger, Bubble Guppies, that
sort of stuff.
>> So, so um a lot of Moana. That's uh
that's my idea of a nightmare. Just
>> Moana's pretty awesome actually.
>> The first three times you see it
>> the first three times and frozen about
twice.
>> Uh so our final two questions. Uh what
sort of advice would you give to a
recent college grad interest in a career
in either finance or investing? Uh what
would you tell them?
>> Yeah. Um first like you know be
yourself. Like we look for people at
Russell from all different kinds of
backgrounds, not just economics or
finance backgrounds. study what you want
to study, do well, and you know, be
committed. But, um, you know, if you
come at it from an outsers's, you know,
station or point of view, embrace that.
That's, uh, you know, this is a a world
where we we want folks that have
different kinds of, um, backgrounds and
and, uh, approaches. Um, you know, I
studied English, Barry, and one
advantage that that actually gave me
early on in my career was that I knew
how to write. And, you know, you think
about how much of our of our business is
done through writing, through email, and
and other ways. Uh, everything you
write, this is the advice now,
everything you write is a reflection of
you and it can come up in, you know,
something you put down on paper can come
up again and again in all sorts of
different ways. We all know that when
when you put something on the internet,
it lives forever truly.
>> And, you know, your careers are long.
You want to make sure that you're you're
that you're properly reflecting the
image that you want to create.
>> Good advice. And our final question, by
the way, that advice applies not only to
writing. Yes. But uh my wife um is a
recently retired teacher and she used to
always warn the kids all the stuff
you're putting on Facebook and Instagram
and Tik Tok. Be aware the colleges
you're applying to are looking at that
and the jobs you're going to apply to.
They're going to find that especially as
you work your way up the up the
corporate ladder. That stuff never goes
away.
>> That's right. And now I'll give you a
counterpoint. you know, we we do 360
reviews at at Russell. And sometimes,
you know, people that are relatively new
in their careers, 25 or 28 year old,
will write a review on somebody that
they work for a couple levels up that I
that I read. And when I read a review
that somebody has put a lot of thought
into, and there's some, you know, praise
and constructive criticism, how to make
things better, I say to myself, this
person would make a good manager. And I
and I think about how can we use them in
other places in the company. So, it's
not just about like when you're writing
about avoiding the things that you don't
want out there in the world that can
harm you. It's also making sure that
you're putting the time and the effort
into writing things that are really
going to help you.
>> Really, really interesting observation
and and and good advice for people just
entering the workforce. Final question.
What do you know about the world of
investing today that would have been
useful uh 30 years ago when you were
first getting started? I wish that 30
years ago I had the confidence to know
that um you know that as an outsider, as
a gay person, as an English major,
someone coming at it from a different
background that um that I could make it
in in in this business that I didn't
have to constantly think about how am I
going to prove myself, but just by being
a good productive contributor, by
raising my hand, you know, and and and
showing a little bit of ambition, by
finding ways to help, that that can be
enough. And sometimes that being an
outsider can actually be a good thing.
You know that it can help you
reunderwite situations and come at it
from a different angle. And if you know
that and you're confident in it and you
use it to your advantage, it can really
help you in your career. Uh I figured
that out along the way. Um it would have
been helpful to know when I first
started.
>> Really fascinating stuff. Thank you,
Zach, for being so generous with your
time. We have been speaking with Zack
Buckwald. He's chairman and chief
executive officer of Russell
Investments. If you enjoyed this
conversation, check out any of the 589
we've done over the previous 11 years.
You can find those at iTunes, Spotify,
YouTube, Bloomberg, wherever you find
your favorite podcasts. And be sure and
check out my new book, How Not to
Invest: The Ideas, Numbers, and
Behaviors That Destroy Wealth and How to
Avoid Them at your favorite bookstore. I
would be remiss if I did not thank the
crack team that helps put these
conversations together each week. Alexis
Noriega is my video producer, Shan Russo
is my researcher, Anna Luke is my
producer. I'm Barry Rholtz. You've been
listening to [music] Masters in Business
on Bloomberg Radio.